This is where things go
a little off the rails.
We're going to talk about Free.
And full disclosure, Free Monads
are usually not what you want [LAUGH] but
they solve a very specific problem and
it's good to know about and
when we're talking about
functional architecture.
We talked about monad transformer
stacks and we talked about free monads.
And we talked about like
these reader type injections.
We saw reader injection through ask or
dependency injection through ask.
And I just wanna show you
an example of using Free.
And it actually turns out,
it was the best solution to the first
app that I wanted to build.
So it's worthwhile to know.
So, what is free, the free monad?
The free monad is a is a way to take your
functions and treat them like data types.
So if I have a function like HTTP GET and
it takes some
arguments like a URL,
instead of it going and
making a task and trying to like,
go do this function right now,
we can actually return a data type,
like HttpGet holding the URL.
So you have a data type now that
represents going to get a URL.
And the reason we want it to be
a monad is because we want to say,
well, I have this data type,
and I want to chain, right?
As if it actually did it.
And I want to get
the contents of that URL, and
I could use something like an HTTP POST.
And we'll do some other
URL like analytics,
with the contents, all right?
And then, what I should end up with
is a data structure representing
the nested tree of computation.
You're basically building an AST.
You're lifting your
functions into datatypes,
treating them as if they're running and
then you're able to interpret them later.
So now we have to create
what we call an interpreter
interpret over here to actually
interpret the status structure.
So we're actually gonna
build this right here.
And what I wanna do is actually
bringing in a new library.
It's called daggy.
We're gonna bring in tag some,
great library, highly recommended.
Daggy, all it does is this whole entire
class I was making stuff like HTTP GET,
it takes some value, take some x and
returns as a data type.
We have methods on it.
This just allows us to, it's in a shorter
syntax for defining these objects.
And then it gives me a function to kind
of decompose a set of different types and
we'll see that in a second.
So the way Daggy works is I'll say,
we have http and we'll call it tag sum.
So it's like a sum type,
it's like a type definition.
Say HTTP is the name of
the superclass kind of thing.
Then we're gonna say we have a get,
and the arguments get has is x.
How about URL?
And then we have a post.
And we'll have the URL and the body.
So, what we've done here is say,
I've defined two data types GET and POST.
And actually let's just take a look
at that before we go any further.
So, if I say Http, Get, whatever, home.
You can console.log this thing.
And it's just like a little data type for
my, Own usage.
See?
It's got a little url home.
So it's a shorter syntax for
those big object literals I was creating.
But what's cool about it is I'm able
to say, if I have a get of home
and I can call Cata on that and
it's a short for Catamorphism.
I can do a pattern matching to say,
well if it's a get, get the URL out and
do something, hi.
And if it's a post, I have the URL and
the body at my disposal,
I'll say, post whatever.
These two functions, so I can
actually run a catamorphism on it and
it will pattern match on what type it is.
And then allow me to destructure
the type and do something to it.
So these two things together will be
using, to kinda short cut this little type
of creation library and
it allows me to easily digest and
match rather than being like, do you have.
Otherwise, I would have to say like,
I don't know what X is, right?
Is this a get or a post?
I'm not sure.
Without Cata I would have to be like,
you know, does x have a body and
it's probably again, so it makes it nice
to be able to pattern match on the type.
All right, cool.
So we've done is taken our
functions get with a URL and
post with the URL and
body and made it a data type.
Then we have this little helper function
called lift f, it lifts it into free.
So if I say httpGet, I can't.
What I can do is make these things
into monads, just by calling lift F.
That's why it's the free monad.
It just lifts the type right in,
just like an array is the free monoid or
you can just throw anything in it.
We can do that with lift F,
can we have this Get, httpGet.
And then we have an httpPost,
and it takes the URL in the body.
And this can certainly be automated.
All we're doing is running the constructor
and then calling lift F right afterwards.
It's just composition.
But just trying to be complete and
show you how this works.
Okay, so
now let's actually run a little app here.
So like app is,
we'll say first get the httpGet on home.
And then we're gonna chain
that with the contents.
And yeah,
we'll do this post with the contents.
And that's not httpPost, httpPost.
So just just so we're aware, these
little helper functions are literally
just the constructors and
I'm throwing them into lift F.
So what we're getting is
a free of httpGet, and
a free of httpPost here, so
that's how I can call chain.
So when I call this function, I can get
a free monad, I can chain the free monad.
What's really nice about this is free
monads aren't anything but data,
they're just a data type and
it just normalizes everything,
and I can just chain and
compose and do whatever I want.
So recall result is going up.
Let's console.log what we have here.
What's going on here?
So this is a little weird.
We have a free monad that has
a property x is holding our get object.
And then, we have this kind
of continuation function.
So we're going to do here is
pass this into an interpreter.
And the way we do that, it's kind of fun.
If you have a free, free holding some
stuff, we can fold map
that out of the free, and
map it into some other type before that
out of this and into something else.
So that's what we'll do.
We're gonna make a little interpreter.
So we have the app, and we're gonna
fold map the app into interpret, and
let's make a little task, right?
We'll make a new task because these things
are gonna go do serious stuff, right?
Actually, you know, I'm just gonna
use ID to stub it out, honestly,
ID is typically what I do when I'm,
kinda architecting, and
then when I've got all my types in order,
I'll just swap out ID with task,
this way I can actually look at what's
going on instead of having it in a task.
So we have our interpret,
let's write that.
Now takes our type x.
And again, we gonna call our Catamorphism
on that, and if it's a get, we get a URL.
Why don't we do like, you know,
got your URL and put this in that.
This will be the contents for
this url, and we have a post,
and it takes a url and a body
and we'll say, posted body to this url.
So, this is interesting.
What we've just done is we've written
an app entirely with data, and
then we've decided at the calling
time which interpreter we wanna use.
This interpreter will
interpret it into strings.
It has to be an ID,
we have to have a target monad here
cuz we're calling full map and
we want to be able to put it into another.
So its Id.of.
Should have mentioned that,
we should usually have a target monad,
it's almost always task.
But if you're doing something like these
little like, log kind of interpreters,
test interpreters, then we can do that.
And now let's run it.
And what do we get?
We get our idea out so
we could just call extract.
Look at that.
It posted the contents for
home to analytics.
So we've we've created a data structure,
we could write more on that,
I think we could do like chain we
are gonna make more get calls and
whatever and
it's just the data structure and
then we interpret that data
structure using foldMap, which just
cascades down and runs each instruction
and interprets it, that's great.
Any questions, yes.
>> So we're using the Catamorphism
as a switch statement.
>> Yeah.
>> There's a lot more going on under
the hood, I know what the monad is but
I'm curious if you comment on that.
We're essentially using it as
a way of doing a bunch of ifs.
>> That's totally right.
We're saying like this x could be a get,
or it could be a post.
And JavaScript doesn't give me
the tools out of the box to say like,
what kind of constructor do I have?
I'll do this and that and this and that.
So it's exactly what it's just
saying like, if you're get do this,
if you're post do that.
Reads really nice and this is really
short so I didn't want to fill up half
the screen with like classes or types and
then try to like write an interpreter.
So that's why we brought doggy in and
I highly recommend it.
It's great if I actually miss
this before it even gets there,
I think daggy will tell me.
Hey, you gave me some stuff and
you didn't have post in there.
That's really nice.
[LAUGH] Like I tried to interpret your
type that said ahead get and post and
you missed a case.
So that's pretty cool.
All right, so
that's free monads in two seconds.
We're actually gonna use that for
the first app.
I really wanna drive
home that this is useful,
I find it very useful when
we did an app where we were
pushing the NPM back when we had Bower,
y'all remember Bower, what a world.
Anyway, [LAUGH] We're like posting like
GitHub packages and all this stuff and
we're doing all this like really nasty
processes with all these side effects and
it was almost impossible to separate
the logic from the side effects.
Cuz it was literally all side effects.
So it was like, how do we test this thing?
How do we work with this thing?
How do we make it so like,
I'm not posting to NPM every time I run
it like that sucks, like I really
want to build this app out, but
I don't want to like
accidentally publish things.
And this was a great solution for that.
And it came in handy then and
then I haven't had to use it since.
[LAUGH] So like, it's there for
you if you need it and it's really useful.